Step 4, conduct follow on interviews.
This step is here more for completeness.
You may not need follow on interviews, but here's what you do if you do.
Now the goal of follow on interviews is to further filter the list of
in person interviews down to even a smaller list.
Say you have narrowed it down to two people and they are both just great,
very equal,
maybe a follow up interview for both would be beneficial to really be sure.
Okay, reflect, review,
and discuss the results of the in person interviews with your team.
Down select, that's the term we use to kind of reduce the list,
I would say to about 2 or 3 at the very most that
you'd like for a follow on interview.
Next,
invite and schedule the next round of interviews and this
is what I call a deep dive interview.
In other words,
in this step you want to have a deeper and richer
discussion with the candidates.
Find a couple of topics to really dig into and help you and
your team differentiate each candidate.
Maybe come up with work scenarios they might find
themselves in and how they might resolve them.
Now the candidates are usually more relaxed and you can discuss job duties and
expectations in more detail and/or drill in on some of their answers from the
first interview to better understand the candidate.
Keep all documentation and notes, as always.
So the outcome of this step then,
we have qualified new hire candidates and we've further
reduced our list to a smaller subset.
Alright, we have all the data,
we have all the feedback and you're ready to make your final selection.
Let's move on to step 5.
Step 5, now it's time to make your final selection.
Okay selection rationale.
Well you have documented your requirements so you know what you are looking for,
and you have your scores if you've given any tests,
and you have all your interview notes from the phone or face to face
that you have taken and that your team has taken.
So you may want to weight your scores, for example maybe technical is 50%,
communication is 25%, leadership is 25% or something like that.
It may be more detailed and it may not be, your choice.
What you'll want to do now is rank the candidates based on the scores.
So how does it look?
You may also move people in the ranking by insightful
comments from your team or yourself.
For example,
this person would be a great fit because we really need a more assertive
person working with our customers in the sales division.
I know he's a little weak technically,
and we gave him a 50% weighting from the technical area,
but I really think he's a good fit.
And then follow that with a brief discussion.
Sometimes the person ranked top numerically may later be
downgraded based on more intangible considerations.
I wish this was a purely objective process, but it isn't.
It's a little bit of gut feel and leadership and experience that goes with it.
So as a team now you'll want to discuss,
agree or disagree with rationale, you just can't say I don't like the person,
you have to say why,
and see if you can come to a consensus of selecting one top candidate.
Now remember,
you are the manager of the team and you have final say and can break ties,
but just don't throw your weight around.
I recommend explaining why the person may or may not be
the best and discuss as a team again.
The more you delegate to the team,
the more they will buy into the new hire and not feel the
person was forced on them into their group.
Now select the top person,
so based on the weighting if you did that or other considerations,
you have a potential person to hire.
Also though, keep in mind who would be number 2 in the list.
Just because you picked your number 1 does not mean
that they'll necessarily pick you.
Now I like to do what I call a pretend hire.
Discuss how this person would augment the team,
what assignments you might give them first.
Sometimes this helps bring out additional questions to discuss with your team.
It's like a use case approach you may have used when designing systems.
Document the reasons selected,
this is important in case there are any downstream issues,
such as your HR department and even a lawsuit.
Okay the outcome of this step is that you have selected the best candidate,
the person that you would like to join the team,
and you have selected candidate number 2 just in case.
Okay, congratulations.
Step 6, finalize the paperwork you need to get this person on board.
As always follow your company's process and I will
continue to reiterate how important this is.
Next would come the offer letter.
Get that offer letter out before you lose this person.
Remember, if you think that this person is so great,
some other company may think so as well.
You are not the only game in town.
Acceptance, that is the potential new hire must accept the offer.
Usually this involves signing an employee agreement,
follow up with with HR or the new hire themselves to
be sure they received the offer,
check to see if they have any questions or concerns.
Sometimes they really want the job but get cold feet.
If you've picked them, don't let them get away.
Rejection and, well, who's on deck.
Well yes, they may reject you, if you can try and find out why.
Since it may be something to do with you or your company,
maybe you can change their mind.
Rejection feedback can be very interesting and also be an
opportunity to improve your acquisition process.
Final acceptance, well congratulations,
your new hire has accepted and all that hard work you did
and your team did has been rewarded.
Figure out when their start date is and,
well usually it's in your offer letter, and get ready to onboard your new hire.
So the outcome of step 6 is the paperwork is complete
and the start date is selected.
Alright to wrap up this section, here are a couple of poignant quotes.
"The secret of my success is that we have gone to exceptional
lengths to hire the best people in the world.
" -Steve Jobs.
Hiring new people should not be taken lightly,
in fact I take hiring very seriously indeed.
Your new hires may make or break your department or even your career.
So keep a sharp eye out for the best you can find,
they will truly make your life easier.
Here's another quote, "you need to have a collaborate hiring process.
" Another quote from Steve Jobs.
As I have mentioned several times in this module,
involve and collaborate with your team, get their inputs,
get their feedback and get their concerns and issues.
You can pick the best person in your eyes,
but if they won't work well with your team,
you may have trouble ahead.
Okay,
now let's look at the questions and let's figure out how you can better design and come up with the right questions to ask.